# 3. Results & Evaluation

## 3.1. Simulation of real-world experiments

Once the model had reached a satisfactory state, Netlogo’s BehaviourSpace functionality was employed, allowing the model to be applied to a sequence of repeated experiments, each with variations in user-adjustable parameters. This allowed each experiment to be recreated and simulated somewhat automatically, with minimal human effort beyond the construction of the model. Each experiment saw an increase of exit width, which, most noticeably, resulted in an increase in the time intervals between individual ant exits.

> Similarly, the pheromone possesses its own intensity and transfer rate. Repellent and pheromone trails can also be completely disabled, which can be used for running other experimental simulations.  The size of room was also variable, wherein the height and width could be adjusted.

_^ Not sure this needs to be here?_


The simulated experiments did highlight a correlation between the results produced by the model and the results from the original experiment. When running an experiment, the ants were observed retreating from the repellent and trying to find a new direction to travel. As the repellent spreads, it increasingly reduces the safe areas that an ant can navigate around. As they are forced closer to the exit by the repellent, an ant will eventually find the exit, leaving a pheromone trail in its wake. As soon as another picks picks up this scent it will follow the trail to the exit and leave its own trail to augment the pre-existing pheromones at the exit, a cycle that repeats to the point at which ants begin to exit in a uniform fashion.

The original experiments identified a relationship between the size of the exit and the amount of time taken until the last ant had escaped. A similar effect was also noted in the results produced by the NetLogo experiments, in which the mean time intervals decreased as the exit width increased, in turn resulting in an increase of escapes. To further study the effect of the exit width on the time interval and number of escapees, further experiments were conducted, this time increasing the intensity and spread rates of the of the repellent, which would drive the ants towards the exit quicker as a result of this increased spread reducing the safe navigable area within the room at a greater rate.  Contrary to expectations, the increased speed of the spread and intensity of the repellent did force the ants towards the exit quicker, but they could not find the an exit as with the same level of efficiency, as a result of an unexpected emergence of grouping behaviour. Since the ants were forced towards the edges of the room, while also leaving pheromone trails, these small groups of ants fell into an almost unending cycle of following their group's own collective pheromone trails. The ants' navigation behaviour within the model led to their inability to find the exit, due to their prioritisation of following pheromone over avoiding repellent. As the repellent engulfed the room, ants still trapped inside could neither find a safer direction to head towards nor find the exit, since the ants were grouped in such a way that the only direction they would navigate towards was that of the pheromone left by members of their own group.

The model was also used to simulate experiments in which the room's length and width were incrementally adjusted. By increasing the amount of safe space that the ants had to navigate around a significant decrease in the time interval between which ants would leave the room was observed. As the repellent would fill the room, ants would retreat and find a space free of repellent. Only a small number of ants would eventually encounter the repellent due to the increased room size. As a result, ants did not have as much urgency to seek out an exit as enough repellent free open space existed for the ants to freely move around. The small number of ants that encountered the pheromone did, however, start to leave pheromone trails, subsequently leading to the occurrence of a single file group of ants navigating in the repellent free areas of the room.

Conversely experiments were performed with decremental changes to the room size instead: room height and width was decreased, which meant that the safe space the ants could occupy was decreased with each experiment. The ants were again forced towards the edges of the room, similar to experiments that saw the repellent intensity increased. As the ants were forced towards the edges, small groups began to form again, resulting in the ants' inability to find an exit due to conflicting behaviours due to their aforementioned NetLogo logic.

Disabling the presence of repellent and pheromones was also tested. When the repellent was disabled, ants wondered around the room and a small number of ants accidentally found the exit with no influence from any repellent. These results, of course, bear similarities to the original control experiments, in which water was used in place of repellent.

Although the experiments did give results akin to those achieved in the original experiments, it must be noted that that there are some flaws in the model's code. The majority of these flaws exist within the navigation logic of the ants. In reality, ants detect their surroundings with their antennae and utilise this sensory input to navigate, behaviour that can also be influenced upon contact with pheromones that force the ant to follow. Unfortunately, the NetLogo model's logic did not accurately reflece this behaviour, which in turn has most likely impacted the results gathered. An example of these flaws is the ants' behaviour of directly turning away from walls upon encountering them. More realistic logic would have dictated that an ant would use the wall as a guide, feeling its way along the obstacle until it could finally be circumvented, in this case when an exit was found. Potentially, this could have partially eliminated some of the risk of those ants avoiding a "death spiral", if not completely.
