# 4. Analysis & Conclusion

## 4.1 Analysis

> _DAN'S JERB_

## 4.2 Conclusion

Taking the flaws in the model into account, the results do appear to support the hypothesis at the heart of these experiments, as the results generated by the model did become somewhat comparable to those of the original experiments that the model sought to emulate.

Regarding the flaws in the model, the unexpected behaviour of the ants could perhaps be remedied by further abstracting their movement, in the form of having them shown moving per-patch as opposed to trying to accurately model their motions. While this may visually appear jarring to the observer and potentially skew exit times slightly, this would have facilitated the implementation of collision and avoidance between both ants and walls, and due to the potential for a reduction in time lost to efforts in debugging the already complex and behaviour, could have bought more time toward implementing more accruate logic for responding to those collisions, and perhaps reducing the likelihood of the miniature "death spirals" that occured.

Ant logic in the model was not in a state that made complete sense in light of the knowledge gleaned from other sources of information regarding the behaviour and even biology of ants. In spite of recommendations to have the ants turn slowly, much like a tank, they were instead often seen making full 180-degree turns in an instant upon encountering other ants, walls and other such physical stimuli. Their response to colliding with other ants and walls made even less sense, in light of the knowledge that ants have no eyes through which to see - their navigation depends entirely on their antennae, through which they would feel obstactles, other ants and their pheromones, as well as the repellent. Simply turning and running away would be counterproductive to them at best and outright suicidal at worst. Upon encountering a wall, an ant in the model should instead have attempted to feel its way along the wall, which would in turn lead them to the exit, while encounters with other ants would provide a transfer of information through their antennae, with which they could use to co-operate. However, given the limited time frame to develop the model, producing an accurate simulation of this information transfer and the resulting response to the encounter would be difficult, if not completely impossible.
