# 1. Introduction & Background

In 2015 Wang, S., Lv, W., & Song, W conducted a series of experiments to observe the behaviours of ants in a mass escape situation, in which the movement of ants trapped in a room filling up with repellent was noted, as well as their collective organisation into lanes of traffic to facilitate a swift escape unhindered by the mass obstruction that would have occurred otherwise (John, Schadschneider, Chowdhury, Nishinari, 2004/2009). In one such experiment, ants were noted to have formed into two separate lines converging into the same route. Though this resulted in frequent head-on collisions that would contribute to the diminishing of escape efficiency, the traffic along this route appeared to maintain its organisation compared to other separate outbound and return trails. A conclusion was reached, in that the head on collisions may have allowed for an exchange of information between the colliding parties (Burd , Aranwela , 2003).

With this in mind, further studies were performed, with the aim of observing ant behaviours in situations comparable to those experienced by human groups. One such study, which involved an experiment in which ants were placed into a container with two symmetrically located exits, showed a “symmetry breaking” phenomenon during which the majority of ants appeared to favour one exit more often than the other (Altshuler, Ramos, Núñez, Fernández, Batista-Leyva, Noda, 2005). Through comparison of these results with those presented in the paper ‘Enhancing the safety of pedestrians during emergency egress’ it was noted that ants could ehxibit behaviour comparable, if not precisely matching, human behaviours in similar situations, and as such ants could serve as a model for humans in some cases (Shiwakoti, Sarvi, Rose, Burd, 2009). This information forms the bases of the experiments conducted by Wang, Lv and Song, with an aim of determining whether the response of a group of ants when faced with a threatening situation can somewhat mimic the response of humans in an evacuation scenario such as a fire and, in the event of the contrary, the extent of the differences between the two (Parisi, Soria, Josens, 2015).


Fig 1. An image of a video recording of an experiment that the researchers did, depicting the environment the experiment took place in. (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/figure?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0131784.g001)

The experiments conducted investigate this hypothesis involved a clear acrylic "room" measuring 7.0cm wide x 8.0cm long and 0.6cm high, with a single exit of variable width and a piece of filter paper soaked with citronella oil, a powerful ant repellent. The height of the room was set to 0.6cm to prevent ants from climbing on top of each other and the exit widths were 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 cm, referred to in the research paper as 1w, 2w, 3w, 4w, 5w and 6w respectively. These widths were based on the average head width of each ant, determined to be approximately 0.3cm. Thus an exit width 0.5cm was deemed sufficiently narrow to allow single ant through at any one time.

The ants employed for the experiments were of the Camponotus Japonicus species, a member of the Formicidae family commonly known as the ‘Japanese carpenter ant’. In each experiment approximately 30 ants were used, all originating from the same nest, though the same ants were never used in the repellent experiment more than once, as a means of ensuring the experiments remain as humane as possible.

To initialise the experiment the 30 ants were placed in the room with the exit closed and the repellent was then added to the opposite side of the exit in the room. The exit was then opened to the initial 1w, and the experiment we considered underway with the introduction of the repellent. The precise moment the first ant succeeded in finding the exit was marked as time zero, with the time taken for each ant escaping there after being recorded in seconds following that first exit. The experiment ended if no ants passed through the exit for one minute. This process was then repeated for all the aforementioned exit widths. An additional experiment was also conducted with the same configuration, though with water in the place of repellent, to serve as a control experiment to compare against those performed with repellent (Wang, Lv, Song, 2015).



Upon reading the target research paper, ‘Behavior of Ants Escaping from a Single-Exit Room’ by Wang, S., Lv, W., & Song, W, the experiment documented was pulled apart in terms of environment, the ants themselves and any variables mentioned.

This helped create a high level picture of the how our model so we could decide how they should be modelled and interact with each other.

After having read the target research paper, ‘Behavior of Ants Escaping from a Single-Exit Room’ by Wang, S., Lv, W., & Song, W, we decided to pull apart the experiment in terms of environment and the ants themselves, so we could decide how they should be modelled and interact with each other.

Above is an image of what the original researchers experiment environment was, from this picture and the descriptions in the paper itself, all the variables and objects that would need to be modelled and controlled could be determined.

The dimensions of the room were 7.0cm wide x 8.0cm long and had a height of 0.6cm. The height of the room was not something that needed to be modelled however, due to the reason of their being a lid on the room was to prevent the ants inside climbing on top of each other. This meant that in the Net Logo environment that we would be modelling in, we would just have to apply simple collision mechanics for the ant agents to cater for this. Regarding the room dimensions, it was decided that the room size could be modelled to the same size if we made a rule that one patch in Net logo was equal to 0.5cm, making the room dimensions 14 patches wide x 16 patches long, but due to us knowing that we may need to change the centimetre to patch ratio it was decided it would be best to implement a configurable way to define the model’s room dimensions depending on the experiment undertaken.

The exit width to the chamber as previously mentioned is varied in the experiments, with the widest body of the ants used in the experiments being around 0.3cm the researchers decided that a width of 0.5cm would allow only one Ant to leave the room at a time. With this the exit sizes chosen to execute the original experiments with where 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0 cm, referred to in the research paper as 1w, 2w, 3w, 4w, 5w and 6w respectively. With the decision made to allow for the room to in our model to be adjusted thereby allowing us to change our patch to centimetre ratio to help configure our experiment, we understood the exit should also be able to have its width varied, so when the model is run the user can switch the size of the exit to the six widths needed.

The species of Ants used in the experiments were called Camponotus japonicus, also known more commonly as the ‘Japanese carpenter ant’. For each experiment around 30 ants were used, all from the same nest, but never used in the repellent experiment more than once, to keep it humane. For our models experiments we had to find a way to abstract the ants and their properties to be able to model them accurately. Our target research paper had useful references to other papers which we could pull some information from, to base any of our abstractions of the ants from.
